doc/search.md, before:

# CirrusSearch and Elasticsearch

Due to performance issues associated with hosting thousands of CirrusSearch-enabled Wikibases in a single Elasticsearch cluster, we have opted to use a single set of indices for all Wikibases and share access to them via Elasticsearch aliases. This is the only cost-effective solution available to us that also allows us to keep up with our current growth estimates.

The gist of it is that we create a single set of indices for all Wikibases using CirrusSearch's built-in maintenance scripts for index creation. Then, we use our Platform API to create aliases in Elasticsearch via cURL for each of our Wikibases, with each alias pointing to the same single set of indices. Since each document created by CirrusSearch automatically contains a field corresponding to the Wikibase's name, our aliases can reuse this field to restrict incoming queries only to the documents of the target Wikibase.

This also keeps us better aligned with Elasticsearch's recommendation of having fewer large indices as opposed to many small indices: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/size-your-shards.html#shard-size-recommendation.

When starting from scratch with a new Elasticsearch cluster, you will first need to [create a shared index](#shared-index-creation), then manually [alias any existing Wikibases](#manually-b) afterwards.

## Shared Index Creation

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph WBaaS Deploy
    initScript[elasticSearchInitJob.sh]
    initJob[elasticSearchInitJob.yaml]
  end
  subgraph MediaWiki["MediaWiki (K8s Job)"]
    indexConfig[maintenance/UpdateSearchIndexConfig.php]
  end
  startA((Start)) --> initScript
  initScript --> initJob
  initJob --> indexConfig
  indexConfig --> Elasticsearch
```

Before creating the shared index, you will need to have created at least one Wikibase instance. Then it is as simple as running the `elasticSearchInitJob.sh` script found in `k8s/helmfile/jobs`. This only needs to be done once, after creating a new Elasticsearch cluster.

Configuration:

- `WBS_DOMAIN`: domain of any existing Wikibase
- `CLUSTER_NAME`: Elasticsearch cluster's name (as configured for MediaWiki)
- `MW_CIRRUSSEARCH_INDEX_BASE_NAME`: shared index's prefix (as configured for Platform API)

For example:

```sh
export WBS_DOMAIN=andrew.wikibase.cloud
export CLUSTER_NAME=default
export MW_CIRRUSSEARCH_INDEX_BASE_NAME=wiki_1
./elasticSearchInitJob.sh
```

## Alias Creation

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph UI[Platform UI]
      createWiki[CreateWiki.vue]
  end
  subgraph Api[Platform API]
    wikiController[WikiController.php]
    aliasInit[jobs/ElasticSearchAliasInit.php]
  end
  startA((Start A)) --> createWiki
  createWiki --> wikiController
  wikiController --> aliasInit
  aliasInit --> Elasticsearch
  startB((Start B)) --> aliasInit
```

#### Automated (A)

Aliases will be created automatically by the Platform API for any Wikibases created after the shared index was created.

#### Manually (B)

For any preexisting Wikibases, you will need to manually initiate the aliasing process for each. This can done by creating a Platform API job using Artisan, which in turn creates an `ElasticSearchAliasInit` job for a specific Wikibase.

Configuration:

- `wiki`: target Wikibase's id

For example:

```sh
kubectl exec deployments/api-scheduler -- bash -c "php artisan job:dispatchNow ElasticSearchAliasInit $wiki"
```

## Shared-index alias model

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph Elasticsearch
    SI1[shared_prefix_content_first]
    SI2[shared_prefix_general_first]
  end

  subgraph Wiki A
    A1[alias: mwdb_A_content]
    A2[alias: mwdb_A_general]
  end

  subgraph Wiki B
    B1[alias: mwdb_B_content]
    B2[alias: mwdb_B_general]
  end

  A1 --> SI1
  A2 --> SI2
  B1 --> SI1
  B2 --> SI2

  noteA[Filter: prefix wiki = mwdb_A-] --> A1
  noteA --> A2
  noteB[Filter: prefix wiki = mwdb_B-] --> B1
  noteB --> B2
```

## Example Alias

```json
{
  "index": "wiki_1_content_first",
  "alias": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4_content",
  "routing": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4_content",
  "filter": {
    "prefix": {
      "wiki": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4-"
    }
  }
}
```

Commit message:

add explaintion for the diagram

doc/search.md, after:

# CirrusSearch and Elasticsearch

Due to performance issues associated with hosting thousands of CirrusSearch-enabled Wikibases in a single Elasticsearch cluster, we have opted to use a single set of indices for all Wikibases and share access to them via Elasticsearch aliases. This is the only cost-effective solution available to us that also allows us to keep up with our current growth estimates.

The gist of it is that we create a single set of indices for all Wikibases using CirrusSearch's built-in maintenance scripts for index creation. Then, we use our Platform API to create aliases in Elasticsearch via cURL for each of our Wikibases, with each alias pointing to the same single set of indices. Since each document created by CirrusSearch automatically contains a field corresponding to the Wikibase's name, our aliases can reuse this field to restrict incoming queries only to the documents of the target Wikibase.

This also keeps us better aligned with Elasticsearch's recommendation of having fewer large indices as opposed to many small indices: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/size-your-shards.html#shard-size-recommendation.

When starting from scratch with a new Elasticsearch cluster, you will first need to [create a shared index](#shared-index-creation), then manually [alias any existing Wikibases](#manually-b) afterwards.

## Shared Index Creation

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph WBaaS Deploy
    initScript[elasticSearchInitJob.sh]
    initJob[elasticSearchInitJob.yaml]
  end
  subgraph MediaWiki["MediaWiki (K8s Job)"]
    indexConfig[maintenance/UpdateSearchIndexConfig.php]
  end
  startA((Start)) --> initScript
  initScript --> initJob
  initJob --> indexConfig
  indexConfig --> Elasticsearch
```

Before creating the shared index, you will need to have created at least one Wikibase instance. Then it is as simple as running the `elasticSearchInitJob.sh` script found in `k8s/helmfile/jobs`. This only needs to be done once, after creating a new Elasticsearch cluster.

Configuration:

- `WBS_DOMAIN`: domain of any existing Wikibase
- `CLUSTER_NAME`: Elasticsearch cluster's name (as configured for MediaWiki)
- `MW_CIRRUSSEARCH_INDEX_BASE_NAME`: shared index's prefix (as configured for Platform API)

For example:

```sh
export WBS_DOMAIN=andrew.wikibase.cloud
export CLUSTER_NAME=default
export MW_CIRRUSSEARCH_INDEX_BASE_NAME=wiki_1
./elasticSearchInitJob.sh
```

## Alias Creation

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph UI[Platform UI]
      createWiki[CreateWiki.vue]
  end
  subgraph Api[Platform API]
    wikiController[WikiController.php]
    aliasInit[jobs/ElasticSearchAliasInit.php]
  end
  startA((Start A)) --> createWiki
  createWiki --> wikiController
  wikiController --> aliasInit
  aliasInit --> Elasticsearch
  startB((Start B)) --> aliasInit
```

#### Automated (A)

Aliases will be created automatically by the Platform API for any Wikibases created after the shared index was created.

#### Manually (B)

For any preexisting Wikibases, you will need to manually initiate the aliasing process for each. This can done by creating a Platform API job using Artisan, which in turn creates an `ElasticSearchAliasInit` job for a specific Wikibase.

Configuration:

- `wiki`: target Wikibase's id

For example:

```sh
kubectl exec deployments/api-scheduler -- bash -c "php artisan job:dispatchNow ElasticSearchAliasInit $wiki"
```

## Shared-index alias model

```mermaid
graph LR
  subgraph Elasticsearch
    SI1[shared_prefix_content_first]
    SI2[shared_prefix_general_first]
  end

  subgraph Wiki A
    A1[alias: mwdb_A_content]
    A2[alias: mwdb_A_general]
  end

  subgraph Wiki B
    B1[alias: mwdb_B_content]
    B2[alias: mwdb_B_general]
  end

  A1 --> SI1
  A2 --> SI2
  B1 --> SI1
  B2 --> SI2

  noteA[Filter: prefix wiki = mwdb_A-] --> A1
  noteA --> A2
  noteB[Filter: prefix wiki = mwdb_B-] --> B1
  noteB --> B2
```

The diagram shows two indices (`content` and `general`) that store data for both `Wiki A` and `Wiki B`, and a set of aliases for each wiki that point to those indices. Each alias can:
* `filter`: a prefix filter on the wiki field (e.g., `mwdb_A-`) so any searches with that alias can only see data belonging to that wiki.
* `routing`: alias is used as a routing key so searches in that wiki hit the right place.

## Example Alias

```json
{
  "index": "wiki_1_content_first",
  "alias": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4_content",
  "routing": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4_content",
  "filter": {
    "prefix": {
      "wiki": "mwdb_3d5a2f31b4-"
    }
  }
}
```
